volk: Start relicense GREP (#33)
gnuradio/greps: grep-00XX-relicense-volk.md

- Decide on a start and end date for this process
    - This period should be between two releases.
- Collect all the re-license agreements
- Add a commit that reflects the license change in every necessary place
- Do a first release under the new license.

In the meantime, we use the following approach.
First, we add a statement to the VOLK repository.
```
Starting at {DATE}, we can only accept contributions under the new license.
```
At that point, we probably notify every open PR about that new requirement.
Then, we require
```
Copyright {YEAR} {CONTRIBUTOR}

This file is part of VOLK

SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-3.0-or-later
```
to be added to every modified file.
cf. [SPDX identifier for LGPLv3+](https://spdx.org/licenses/LGPL-3.0-or-later.html).
This entails a careful rework of the current license statements in all files.

### The aftermath

Assume most contributors re-licensed their VOLK contributions but some did not.
How do we deal with that situation?

- We could extend the transition period and hope contributors where just to busy to re-license their work yet.

> - Decide to remove contributions. This might imply that we lose features and change our API which either requires someone else to step up and re-implement this feature or definitely do a new major release that indicates API breakage.

Reviewer: I think option 2 is the only viable one. Let's just pick that.

- Give up on the relicensing effort and revert to GPLv3+.

A contributor who does not want or cannot re-license their work, cannot be forced or pushed to do so.

We really hope to avoid this situation but need to be aware that we might face it anyways.
Otherwise, we risk to stay in relicensing limbo.

#### The first relicensed VOLK version

We need to figure out the prefered way to announce the completed relicensing effort.
We could consider the new license an API breaking change and release a new major version.

> Alternatively, we could continue the current major release series and just have another release.

Reviewer: We should agree on what this is before completing. I think the breaking-change version update is the right way.

Author: Yes. Basically, at this point the license change is a breaking change. We will continue with a new major version.

Since then, VOLK became its own project with its own repository and leadership.
While it is still a core dependency of GNU Radio and considers GNU Radio as its main user, others may want to use it too.
Especially, long term VOLK contributors expressed their desire to be able to use VOLK in a broader set of projects.

### State of the GREP

This GREP currently serves as a platform to collect all the necessary information and ideas to relicense VOLK.
Everyone is invited to contribute to this GREP with ideas, pull requests, comments etc.

## Copyright / License

This GREP is licensed as CC-BY-ND.
Copyright 2021 Johannes Demel and any co-author listed above.

## Motivation

We recognize the desire of our long term contributors to be able to use VOLK with their contributions in their projects.
This may explicitly include proprietary projects.
We want to enable all contributors to be able to use VOLK wherever they want.
At the same time, we want to make sure that improvements to VOLK itself are easily obtained by everyone, i.e. strike a balance between permissiveness and strict copyleft.

> Previously, several attemps were made to relicense VOLK without success.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Doesn't matter, I would say.

Author: Thanks

With a formal process and a clear vision laid out, we hope to be able to get everyone on board.

Since VOLK is a library it should choose a fitting license.

> If we see greater adoption of VOLK in more project, we hope to also see more contributions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we see greater adoption of VOLK in more project, we are confident that we will receive more contributions.
```

Author: Thanks!

May it be bug fixes, new kernels or even contributions to core features.

## Description

In order to facilitate this relicensing effort, we need to got through several steps.

### Notification

We consider it to be very important to let every contributor know that the wish to relicense by some contributors exists.
A first step would be to notify every contributor of this GREP.

### The proposed license

We propose [LGPLv3+](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-3.0.html) for the new license.
LGPLv3+ strikes a balance between permissiveness and obligation to provide modified source code.
All modifications to VOLK should be made available under the same terms under which everyone can use VOLK.

> This should not require users to share code that uses VOLK unaltered.

Reviewer: It does, practically speaking, make it hard/impossible to use VOLK in statically compiled proprietary projects. But I still think LGPL3 is the right choice!

Author: The whole "static vs dynamic linking" license discussion is confusing. Are there any good sources on the subject? Something we can refer to?

Reviewer 2: The general idea is that if you ship something using lgpl code, the user has to have a way to replace that code by a new  / updated / modified version of it.  If it's provided as a dynamic library, it's easy to do ... if it's link statically, you'd need to provide binary object before the final linking along with any linking script / tool to allow the user to redo the final link with a modified version of the library.

Whether one submitted code under a CLA or with a DCO, every contributor must re-submit their code under the new license.
A contributor may submit their code to any project, including VOLK under a new license, even if that code was submitted under a CLA.

### The process

Currently, we have around 65 contributors to VOLK.
In order to relicense VOLK, every contributor must re-submit their code under the new license.
Once all contributors re-licensed their code, we can add a new commit to VOLK that updates the license as well as all the license headers.
We consider it to be favorable to do this transition in-place, i.e. in the same repository, to not add any confusion.
This approach should keep things simple.
Most importantly, we do not introduce any new places to search for VOLK which would introduce confusion.

#### how to
We need to figure out how we collect all the contributors re-licensed code.
This might be a file within the VOLK repo where everyone adds a signed-off commit that states they re-submit their code under the new license.
Alternatively, we may collect all the contributors re-license statements in another place.

> Though, this might raise questions about long term documentation of this change.

Reviewer: This needs to be crystal-clear of course. I think your process is fine.

# GREP [00XX] -- [Re-license VOLK under LGPL]

- Original Author: [Johannes Demel <demel@uni-bremen.de>]
- Champion: [Johannes Demel <demel@uni-bremen.de>]
- Status: Draft

History:

- 18-Mar-2021: Initial Draft
- 28-Aug-2021: Final Draft

## Abstract

We want to remove usage entry barriers from VOLK.
As a result, we expect greater adoption and a growing user and contributor base of VOLK.

> This move helps to spread the value of Free and Open Source Software in the SIMD community, wich so far is dominated by non-FOSS software.

Reviewer 3: typo "wich" -> "which"

Especially, long term VOLK contributors expressed their desire to be able to use VOLK in a broader set of projects.

### State of the GREP

This GREP received a lot of feedback and incorporates this feedback.
Now, we consider it ready for submission.

## Copyright / License

This GREP is licensed as CC-BY-ND.
Copyright 2021 Johannes Demel and any co-author listed above.

## Motivation

We recognize the desire of our long term contributors to be able to use VOLK with their contributions in their projects.
This may explicitly include proprietary projects.
We want to enable all contributors to be able to use VOLK wherever they want.
At the same time, we want to make sure that improvements to VOLK itself are easily obtained by everyone, i.e. strike a balance between permissiveness and strict copyleft.
With a formal process and a clear vision laid out, we hope to be able to get everyone on board.

Since VOLK is a library it should choose a fitting license.
If we see greater adoption of VOLK in more projects, we are confident that we will receive more contributions.
May it be bug fixes, new kernels or even contributions to core features.

## Description

> In order to facilitate this relicensing effort, we need to got through several steps.

Reviewer 3: typo "got" -> "go"

### Notification

We consider it to be very important to let every contributor know that the wish to relicense by some contributors exists.
Based on the information we can gather through git commit names and email addresses as well as GitHub accounts, we notify every contributor of this GREP and ask them to resubmit their contributions.

### The new license

We propose [LGPLv3+](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-3.0.html) for the new license.
LGPLv3+ strikes a balance between permissiveness and obligation to provide modified source code.
All modifications to VOLK must be made available under the same terms under which everyone can use VOLK.
This should not require users to share code that uses VOLK unaltered.

### All contributors need to re-submit their code under the new license

Whether one submitted code under a CLA or with a DCO, every contributor must re-submit their code under the new license.

> A contributor may submit their code to any project, including VOLK under a new license, even if that code was submitted under a CLA.

Reviewer 3: I would advise adding something like "As noted below and here for completion: In reality contributors add their name to a list of those who approve of moving to the new license, and by adding themself to the list, a contributor "resubmits" their code to VOLK under the new license. There is no formal or technical (e.g., a PR) resubmission of code."

Reviewer 4: yes, that would have helped me – as noted somewhere above in the discussion, I was originally assuming there'd be an actual re-submission of code.

### The process

Currently, we have around 65 contributors to VOLK.
In order to relicense VOLK, every contributor must re-submit their code under the new license.
During the transition period, we want to be able to accept new contributions.

> 1. We notify every contributor that we want to relicense VOLK.

Reviewer: Maybe:
```suggestion
1. We notify every contributor that we will to relicense VOLK.
```
?

> 1. We notify every contributor that we will to relicense VOLK.

Reviewer 4: typo: one "to" too many.

Reviewer 3: yup

2. New contributions are required to be submitted under the new license.
3. Contributors are kindly asked to resubmit their contributions.

> 4. After all contributors have resubmitted their contributions, we have a new major release and continue VOLK development under the new license.

Reviewer: After all, or after a vast/useful majority?

Reviewer: Note: You can refer to the section below which talk about what happens if we have non-signers.

Reviewer 3: I would say here that this "4" is the ideal, but reality is that we will keep moving forward (2) regardless of the state of the relicensing effort. I'd advise restating this item.

The new major release updates all license headers to state the new license.
The transition process is executed in-place, i.e. in the current VOLK repository, to not add any confusion.

#### How to resubmit contributions
We decided to adopt the following process to resubmit contributions.

1. We collect all resubmissions in a file inside the VOLK repository.
2. All contributors are kindly asked to add themselves to this list.
3. By adding themself to the list, a contributor resubmits their code to VOLK under the new license.
4. Contributors have several options to add themselves to the list

>     - Open a PR against the VOLK repository and add themself to the list.
>     - Write an email to the current VOLK maintainers that clearly states the required author information. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Open a PR against the VOLK repository and add themself to the list.
    - Write an email to the current VOLK maintainers that clearly states the required author information.
    - Add a line saying they agree to a public GitHub issue.
    - Sign a paper form and make it available to us. This is generally cumbersome, but can be a useful method at events where people are available in-person.
```

Reviewer: Rationale: We should make it as easily as humanly possible to resubmit. If we only get a developers attention for 30 seconds, those need to suffice.

Reviewer 3: agreed with @mbr0wn here

Author: I agree. I just added it. We'd need to figure out who'd be in charge of storing them though. Would this be a SETI thing?

##### Suggested wording wording
I, {contributor name}, hereby resubmit all my contributions to the VOLK project and repository under the terms of the LGPLv3+. My GitHub handle is {github handle}, my email addresses used for contributions are: {email address}, ... .

The maintainers add the contributor to the list together with their statement in the git commit message.
We add this statement in a git commit message for long term documentation purposes.

##### Required information and purpose

We ask for the following information to be able to identify all contributions of individual contributors.

- Date of resubmission
- Name of contributor
- GitHub handle (if applicable) to ease identification of individual contributions.
- git email addresses used for contributions.

These data points are used in git commits as well.

### Transition period

It will take time until every contributor re-licenses their code.
We want to be able to continue VOLK development while we are in this license transition period.

The latest VOLK release is 2.5.
We start to collect resubmissions.

> After all we collected all resubmissions, we will have a new major release VOLK 3.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After we collected all resubmissions, we will have a new major release VOLK 3.0.
```

# GREP [00XX] -- [Relicense VOLK]

- Original Author: [Johannes Demel <demel@uni-bremen.de>]
- Champion: [Johannes Demel <demel@uni-bremen.de>]
- Status: Draft

History:
- 18-Mar-2021: Initial Draft

## Abstract

> We have several community requests to relicense VOLK under a more permissive license.

Reviewer 5: I recommend framing this not from the perspective of "some people want a different license" (which is likely to still be the case after this GREP, actually), but rather from what the goal of taking this action is -- namely, removing barriers to adoption, growing the user & contributor base of VOLK, and spreading the value of Free & Open Source Software in the SIMD community, which so far is dominated by non-FOSS.

Author: Thanks! I adopted your comments.

The proposed new license is [LGPLv3+](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-3.0.html).
Historically, VOLK was part of GNU Radio. Thus, it made total sense to use GPLv3+ just like GNU Radio.
Since then, VOLK became its own project with its own repository and leadership.
While it is still a core dependency of GNU Radio and considers GNU Radio as its main user, others may want to use it too.
Especially, long term VOLK contributors expressed their desire to be able to use VOLK in a broader set of projects.

### State of the GREP

> This GREP does currently serve as a platform to collect all the necessary information and ideas to relicense VOLK.

Reviewer 4: - does currently serve
+ currently serves

Author: Thanks!

## Motivation

We recognize the desire of our long term contributors to be able to use VOLK with their contributions in their projects.
This may explicitly include proprietary projects.
We want to enable all contributors to be able to use VOLK wherever they want.
At the same time, we want to make sure that improvements to VOLK itself are easily obtained by everyone, i.e. strike a balance between permissiveness and strict copyleft.
Previously, several attemps were made to relicense VOLK without success.
With a formal process and a clear vision laid out, we hope to be able to get everyone on board.

Since VOLK is a library it should choose a fitting license.
If we see greater adoption of VOLK in more project, we hope to also see more contributions.
May it be bug fixes, new kernels or even contributions to core features.

## Description

In order to facilitate this relicensing effort, we need to got through several steps.

### Notification
We consider it to be very important to let every contributor know that the wish to relicense by some contributors exists.
A first step would be to notify every contributor of this GREP.

> ### Another license discussion

Reviewer 4: Do we really want to foster that discussion here? I assume you've got your own ideas, and you've talked to those who can't contribute under GPLv3, so you've already made up your mind what the best license is. If we explicitly invite that discussion here, we'll have years of fun discussing things. The discussion is open, anyways: If people don't agree to LGPL3+, they can comment on this grep.

Author: So you suggest to rewrite this GREP such that it says: We want to relicense to LGPLv3+, these are our reasons. My wording suggests that this is an open discussion.

Reviewer 5: I agree with Marcus, here. I recommend making the proposal "Re-license VOLK under LGPL" rather than making it a question. The community has spent enough time on this topic that I think we have strong consensus justifying it :)

Author: Thanks for your insights here. I updated this section accordingly.

Currently, the proposed license is LGPLv3+.
Though, other licenses, possibly more permissive are available too.
This includes [3-Clause BSD](https://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-3-Clause), [MIT](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT) and [Apache-2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
Prelimenary discussion on the subject matter revealed that Apache-2.0 is out of favor by some.
We assume that LGPLv3+ strikes a balance between permissiveness and obligation to provide modified source code.

### All contributors need to sign off for the new license

Before we can adopt a new license, we need approval by every contributor to basically resubmit their contributions under the new license.

> [There is more to this discussion and how this evolved but others are more qualified to add to that discussion]

Reviewer 5: Is there something specific you are looking for, here? I think your topline mostly covered it. Basically, contributors no longer own the copyright to their work, but their CLA with the FSF granted them back a license to do whatever they want with the code (including use it in a fully proprietary work, for example), so they can re-submit it to a non-GPL'd / FSF-owned project.

Author: Yes, I know there were previous efforts. But basically, I changed my mind. I try to write this GREP now such that it is focused on relicensing and not history.

### The process
We need to figure out how we collect all the contributor approvals.

> This might be a file within the VOLK repo where everyone adds a signed-off commit to approve the new license.

Reviewer 5: You don't need them to "approve the new license", but rather re-license the work. 

I would also make it clear how it will be handled from a code repository perspective. Will you fork the repo and create a new version with the new license? Will you keep it all in one repo, and basically create a commit that changes the license throughout all the code once everyone has agreed?

Author: I updated this section. Still, is there are blueprint, we can follow?
Or do you have a specific process in mind that seems favorable?

Reviewer: LLVM relicensing: https://foundation.llvm.org/docs/relicensing/

Currently, we have around 65 contributors to VOLK.

### The meantime
It might take time to gain approval by every contributor.

> We want to be able to continue VOLK development while we are in this license transition period.

Reviewer 4: Does that entail a CMake flag that disables all non-permissive code, so that people can actually use the parts of VOLK that are already available under non-strong-copyleft terms?

Author: If the transition period is, e.g. a month, I'd argue it is more sensible to wait for enough approvals. If it was a year or so, this might justify the additional work with a CMake flag. I'd really like to avoid that though.

Reviewer 5: I think this is going to take a while.

That said, I'm also not sure it's worth trying to split the distribution to have GPL and non-GPL builds? That seems like it would be really hard to manage. You could do something like gradually update everything as you get new code & relicenses, and then swap the whole thing over to a completely non-GPL distro in an atomic commit?

Author: I updated the text here to be more precise.

I have no idea how long things will take. I just hope it won't take too long.

Reviewer: I think it'll take a while to get everyone's approval, but it might not take too long to get a few core contributor's approval sooner. That would give us a good core to build upon.

Reviewer: For the stragglers, and those who don't want to relicense, I think it's the right way to nuke those kernels or contributions. If people need them, they can contribute new versions thereof.

Reviewer 3: I think it'll take a month to get the vast majority of contributors in place; there'll be a long tail for another 95% & some just never will. I agree @mbr0wn that we need to be willing and able to remove kernels for folks who do not agree after some amount of time -- 2 months maybe -- so as to allow for VOLK development to move forward without splitting releases between GPL and LGPL versions ... which I think will be a PITA.

> We need to work out a clear path how to deal with contributions in the mean time.

Reviewer 4: Call me naive, but that sounds like: starting {DATE}, new contributions are under LGPLv3 (exceptions on a per-case basis). What would be the upside of accepting GPL contributions?

Author: Yes. Do you suggest to put the following in the README:
```
Starting at {DATE}, we use LGPLv3+ for all new contributions. 
```
How do we reflect that in files that are modified? Require an update to the license identifier?

Reviewer 5: Agreed. And yes, updated files will need to have two copyright & license statements.

Author: Thanks. I added a proposal how to deal with new PRs during tehe transition.

This will probably prior include relicensing approval by a majority of contributors.
Then, we will probably state that new contributions will only be accepted under the terms of the new license.
The details need to be worked out.

### The aftermath
Assume most contributors approved to relicense VOLK but some did not.
How do we deal with that situation?
A contributor who does not approve the new license, cannot be forced or pushed to do so.

> Either, we decide to give up on this relicensing effort or, we are required to remove all contributions by that contributor.

Reviewer 4: Third option, fork off a volk-gpl library that's not accepting new kernels, and is the home of these. Question is whether that isn't a dangerous / work-heavy thing to do.

Author: Actually, it is quite cumbersome to maintain several versions. So far, we are quite happy to maintain only one branch `master`. We might want to rename that branch to `main`. Though, that's a different discussion.

Reviewer 5: Yes, I recommend renaming.

And yeah, the other option is undertaking a new implementation effort. There's no way it wouldn't be work intensive.

Author: The [Rename default branch issue](https://github.com/gnuradio/volk/issues/461) is open now.

Reviewer: @bhilburn are you in favour of renaming master -> main, or renaming VOLK to something else?

Reviewer 5: My comment was re: renaming `master` to `main`

Author: I addressed the discussion here and the "renaming" confusion discussion is carried on in a new issue. I mark this discussion as resolved.

Though, we hope to avoid this situation.
Yet, we need to define a final date by which we will end the transition period.

> Otherwise, we risk to stay in relicensing limbo.

Reviewer 4: Maybe say that you'll also want to do a major release at that point, simply to make that distinction easy for consumers of the library. E.g., if you've got non-GPL code that wants to use VOLK, `find_package(VOLK, >=14.0)`, simple as that.

Maybe defining a "last version number that also includes optionally enabled GPL kernels" is better than a date?

Author: First, I thought, we'd bump this to a new major version number. This might be the case if we need to drop kernels entirely. Otherwise, I'd probably like to stick with the VOLK 2.x line.
How does a license change work with packaging? @maitbot Do we need to consider anything here?

Reviewer: I definitely wouldn't do this within the 2.x line.

Reviewer: > Maybe defining a "last version number that also includes optionally enabled GPL kernels" is better than a date?

A date still works if we require all contributions to any VOLK branch to be LGPL, or relicensable under LGPL.

Author: I really don't have an idea how long it'll take for most contributors to react to such an email and take action. Based on our experience after a short while, we can make a good statement.
Alternatively, we can set a date e.g. 2 months into the future. Then we follow the best academia tradition and extend this deadline.

### The result

> VOLK is available under a new license that better meets the needs of its contributors.

Reviewer 5: Really, the needs of the community. It's true that the contributors all want a different license, but that's a narrow slice of the overall community 🙂

Author: Thanks! I updated this.
